---
layout: essay-layout.njk
title: A Death
date: 2020-05-08
tags: ['essay']
--- 

Our next door neighbor was found dead the other day. No one knows when he actually passed. The day was overripe with suburban dread: One of the hottest days of the year so far. The kind of day that invites you outside to celebrate the sun only to push you back inside with an oily sheen on your face and guilt gnawing on the back of your brain over missing the nice weather. The only way to escape the jittery unease on days like that is to be hard at work.

Kelly noticed that his mailbox was overflowing and fliers for pizza deals and lawn care services and real estate agents were scattered around his azaleas. Then it occurred to us that we hadn’t seen him take the trash cans out on trash day in nearly a month.

He kept to himself. We described him as a hermit and really meant it. He never answered our neighborly hellos when we chanced to see him shambling around his yard or walking to the grocery store. We later found out that he was severely autistic and had lived with his family in that same house for about seventy years. Eventually he was the last one left. He wasn’t prone to keeping his grass mowed but even so it was getting out of hand. I’d been complaining for weeks that it had gotten past my knees and was closing in on waist high. By way of a hushed interchange about what to do (not wanting the kids playing in the street to hear us talking about death), we decided that I’d go up and knock. If I’m being honest, I was always scared of him and at this point wasn’t sure whether I was more afraid of him answering or what the implications would be of him not answering. But after several knocks and rings of the doorbell went unanswered Kelly called the non-emergency line for the Norfolk Police Department.

The first cop that came by looked in the windows, told us we’d smell it if there was a body, and then went on his way. A few days later we called again and this time the officer who answered the call went inside and found the house to be remarkably clean, the TV on, and Clyde Etheridge laying in his bed with mold growing on him.

I found out the last part from my neighbor after the fact. Never one to shy away from a chance to align himself with the local authorities, he confidently strolled across the street to greet the officer upon his arrival. I watched from the front porch, not wanting to interfere but not really knowing what to do either. When my neighbor looked up at me from his conversation with the police and made the telltale sign of slicing a finger across his neck I went inside and told Kelly that Etheridge, as we called him, was dead.

So the next day I went over and mowed the grass, daring glances in the windows. I flinched when I came around the corner of the house to see a white sheet hanging off the window unit and jumped every time the hulking, overgrown shrubs stabbed me with a dead branch.

Yard work notwithstanding, I’ve spent more time in bed than anywhere else since the shelter in place order was issued in Virginia. I  missed helping my parents move out of my childhood home and onto the family farm in eastern North Carolina that was originally owned by my great-grandfather Delton, for whom my son is named.

I’ve done very little that could be quantified as work. In fact, I originally wanted this essay to be about work but I couldn’t get my act together to say I’d learned enough to write down. I did get a chance to serve as an ad hoc chaplain for a group of friends who wanted to hear if I had a Word to share. They told me they were greedy for signs of the sacred. I did pretty well at our first meeting, reading Jonah from _The Jesus Storybook Bible_ and the W.S. Merwin poem _Finding a Teacher_. I tacked on a quaint addendum after the poem about how the fishing friend is Jesus. The next week I drank too many whiskey sours and had to call off my appearance at the gathering.

The day we called the police about Etheridge, one of our other neighbors was out for a walk with his six year old son, whose right knee was the size of a football and wrapped in bandages. He’d been hit by a car several days before. The driver was a flight attendant who had been laid off and was delivering food to make ends meet. She was looking at a map on her phone when he shot out of his driveway on his bike into her path. I heard the screaming from where I was laying in bed. I didn’t know where Kelly and Delton were at the time but I vaguely wondered who it might be that was screaming. Before falling back asleep I decided that someone would come get me if I was needed. It was early afternoon and I had the blinds turned up instead of down because they block out more light that way.

How long would I have to lay in bed for mold to start growing at my hairline? Behind my ears? I spend my days in my tomb, doing just enough work to not avoid suspicion of having gone AWOL by my employers, watching horror movies and sometimes porn. As it happens, I’ve come up with a good definition for horror: In most movies the characters are forced to reckon with the onslaught of an antagonist. In horror, the same is true. But the possibilities of death, torture, or possibly being eaten alive by some crouching monster are usually realized in gruesome detail. The characters find themselves totally unequipped for saving themselves and the hope for outside help is usually slim to none. There is seldom a triumph of will. No girding of loins and realization of a great truth that inspires them to overcome the odds. There’s death and torture and survival is usually incidental if it is realized at all. You might say that horror is more about what’s not there than what is. In other words, there’s no salvation.

One office I have been able to keep is the daily reading of the Word and writing in my notebook. This is no act of spiritual piety. I’m more akin to the nagging widow than Hannah. I come lurching out of my bedroom at five in the morning to slug down coffee and pester God to give me things. I read the prophets and I try to goad God into speaking to me like he did to Jeremiah. I blather at Him to show me a work worth my time by some atavistic, Old Testament signal. I brag that I’m worth a Holy edict or a burning bush. I call it prayer.

When I read Proverbs, I like to think of myself as the son seeking wisdom, obtaining favor from the Lord. It’s become clear to me lately that I am the sluggard, smelling of vinegar but safe, at least, from the lion outside. I’m equal parts Zimri, looking over my shoulder to see Phinehas coming at me with a spear, and Lazarus, four days dead and unable to hear the weeping outside. I despair about the consequences of inaction. And yet I languish in dim lighting with heavy eyelids and closed curtains.

But then the other day I read Hebrews. I read that God used to speak to our fathers by prophets but in these last days he has spoken to us by His Son. This seems to me a rebuke more than anything else. _Why would I give you the word meant for Jeremiah?_ _Is my Son not good enough for you?_ And I read about drinking milk. Who drinks milk? Babies. The unskilled, to use the parlance of Hebrews. Babies are unable to help themselves, unable to even get up from laying down without a parent’s hand to support them.

I am terrified of how utterly incapable I am of saving myself. There’s a corpse next door and bloody children screaming in the street. I’m smothering under my weighted blanket. My knees ache like they’re aging too fast. Is there really any other way that age comes on? But what scares me even more, what holds me in this catatonia, what can only be described as true fear, is the premonition that one day when I fall asleep I’ll be awakened by the sound of grinding stone to hear a voice speak the words: Come forth.
